ADINTOOL(1)                                           ADINTOOL(1)



NAME
       adintool - multi-purpose tool to record/split/send/receive
       speech data

SYNOPSIS
       adintool -in inputdev -out outputdev [options...]

DESCRIPTION
       adintool analyzes  speech  input,  finds  speech  segments
       skipping  silence,  and  records  the detected segments in
       various ways.  It performs speech detection based on zero-
       cross  number  and power (level), and records the detected
       parts to files or other output devices sucessively.

       adintool is a highly-functioned version of  adinrec.   The
       supported  input  device  are:  microphone input, a speech
       file, standard tty input, and network socket (called adin-
       net server mode).  The speech segments are saved to output
       devices: speech files, standard tty  output,  and  network
       socket  (called  adin-net  client mode).  For example, you
       can record the incoming speech segments to files with suc-
       cessively-numbered suffixes, or send them to speech recog-
       nition engine julius to recognize them.

       The output is not buffered: the receiver  can  get  speech
       data  with only a slight delay after a speech starts.  The
       speech detection algorithm is as same as that of  adinrec.

       Output  format  is WAV, 16bit (signed short), monoral.  If
       the file already exist, it will be overridden.

INPUT
       The input device should be specified by one of the follow-
       ing options:

       -in mic
              Microphone input (default)

       -in file
              Speech  data  file.  Supported format is RAW (16bit
              big endian) and WAV (no compression) etc (depending
              on the compilation time setting).
              The  input  file name should be given later: prompt
              will appear after startup.

       -in adinnet
              Make adintool "adinnet server", waiting for connec-
              tion  from adinnet client and receiving speech data
              from there via tcp/ip socket.
              Default port number is 5530, which can  be  altered
              by option "-port".

       -in netaudio
              If  supported, get input data from NetAudio/Datlink
              server.  Host and unit name should  be  given  with
              "-NA host:unit" option.

       -in stdin
              Read speech data from standard tty input.  Only RAW
              and WAV format is supported.

OUTPUT
       Specify one of these below  to  select  an  output  device
       which  the  detected  speech segments are going to written
       to.

       -out file
              Output to files.  The base filename should be given
              by  option  like "-filename foobar".  Actually, the
              detected segments are recorded  in  separate  files
              such  as  "foobar.0000",  "foobar.0001"  and so on.
              The four-digit ID begin with 0.  This initial value
              can  be  set  explicitly by option "-startid".  The
              output format is WAV, 16bit signed.   This  can  be
              changed by "-raw" option.

       -out adinnet
              Make  adintool  "adinnet client", making connection
              to an adinnet server on a  host,  and  send  speech
              data  to the server.  The hostname should be speci-
              fied by option "-server".  The default port  number
              is  5530,  which  can be altered by option "-port".
              The available adinnet server so far is adintool and
              Julius.

       -out stdout
              Output  to standard tty output in RAW, 16bit signed
              (big endian).

OPTIONS
       -nosegment
              Re-direct whole input speech data to output device,
              without  speech  detection  and segmentation.  With
              this option, the output filename does not have  its
              four-digit ID appended.

       -oneshot
              Record only the first speech segment.

       -freq threshold
              Sampling frequency (Hz, default=16000)

       -lv threslevel
              Level threshold (0-32767, default=2000)

       -zc zerocrossnum
              Zero   cross   number   threshold   in   a   second
              (default=60)

       -headmargin msec
              Header margin of each speech  segment  (unit:  mil-
              liseconds) (default: 400)

       -tailmargin msec
              Tail margin of each speech segment (unit: millisec-
              onds) (default: 400)

       -nostrip
              Disable skipping of invalid zero samples  (default:
              enabled)

       -zmean Enable zero mean subtraction to remove DC offset.

       -raw   Output  in RAW (no header) 16bit, big engian format
              (default: WAV)

EXAMPLE
       Record microphone input only for the speech-detected  part
       in "data.0000.wav", "data.0001.wav", ...:

           % adintool -in mic -out file -filename data

       Split   a   large   speech   data  "foobar.raw"  to  "foo-
       bar.1500.wav", "foobar.1501.wav", etc:

           % adintool -in file -out file -filename foobar
             -startid 1500
             (enter the input filename after startup)
             enter filename->foobar.raw
             ....

       Send whole speech file to other host via tcp/ip socket:

         [sender]
           % adintool -in adinnet -out file -nosegment
         [receiver]
           % adintool -in file -out adinnet -server hostname
             -nosegment

       Send microphone input to Julius running on other host:

       (1) Transmit whole input, and let Julius execute
           speech detection and recognition:

         [Julius]
           % julius -C xxx.jconf ... -input adinnet
         [adintool]
           % adintool -in mic -out adinnet -server hostname
             -nosegment

       (2) Detect speech segment at input client side
           (adintool), and transmit only the detected parts
           to Julius, and recognize them:

         [Julius]
           % julius -C xxx.jconf ... -input adinnet
         [adintool]
           % adintool -in mic -out adinnet -server hostname


SEE ALSO
       julius(1), adinrec(1)

COPYRIGHT
       Copyright (c) 2001-2003  Nara  Institute  of  Science  and
       Technology, Japan

AUTHORS
       LEE Akinobu (NAIST, Japan)
       contact: julius@kuis.kyoto-u.ac.jp

LICENSE
       Same as Julius.



                              LOCAL                   ADINTOOL(1)
